Sector scheduled to hear from
Pharmacy Sector Leaders Forum for 10 minutes.
Let's, let's make it happen. Thank you.
We will move to public session, please.
Thank you, Tracy. Okay.
Thank you. Good afternoon.
Afternoon everybody. Hello.
Welcome to the Health Committee.
Very good to have you with us this afternoon.
Uh, you're giving us a briefing on the pharmacy sector.
We have you here for 10 minutes.
Um, if you want to leave some time for time for questions,
that'd be appreciated, but ultimately that's up to you
and we have your document that you've sent
around Fantastic to that too.
So we will hand that time over to
You now. Great. Uh, so
good afternoon everyone. I'm, um, Michael Han.
I'm the current, uh, chair
of the Pharmacy Sectors Leaders Forum, and also the chair
and president of the Pharmaceutical Society of New Zealand.
Uh, we'll most certainly leave some time for questions, um,
at the end of during our 10 minute allotment.
Absolutely. Um, so I also just wanna note sitting here,
I've got the CEO of the Pharmaceutical Society
of New Zealand, and our clinical director of
and of policy, um, from PNZ, who also are the secretariat
for the PSLF um, group.
So as, as you know, we're here to talk about the current
and future state of pharmacy in New Zealand.
Um, so kind of, you know,
following along from the material we supplied you,
who is PS Pharmacy Sectors Leaders Forum.
It's made up of, uh, 13 organizations
across the pharmacy sector.
All the chairs or presidents or, um, and heads of school
and also the pharmacy council form part of that membership.
So we canvas a whole way from primary hospital,
general practice and academia and, um, the regulatory body.
And so we are a group that is committed
to a sustainable health system,
and we are advocating for pharmacy, um,
right across the system.
And so, um, from, you know, the group agrees, you know,
change is needed now.
Um, and with the right tools, the pharmacy
forum can be a driver for that change.
Uh, we, um, believe that the sector wants it,
the pharmacy sector and the,
and the public needs it from a, um, access point of view.
So in terms of, uh, uh, some, you know,
high level background on pharmacy,
we're quite a young workforce, um, predominantly female.
Um, and our pharmacists, uh, um, you know,
essentially everywhere medicines are,
there are a thousand bricks
and mortar pharmacies across the, across the country.
So, you know, some fantastic access there as well
as pharmacists integrated into
general practice and into hospital.
Um, unfortunately, um, we, in terms
of our workforce sustainability, a lot
of our young pharmacists are coming out.
Uh, they quickly become a bit, uh, disillusioned at,
from their career, uh, from
what they thought they were going to be doing
and the pressures that they're facing
and they're leaving moving overseas
or into other, other careers.
So, uh, you know, from that we've recognized
that we really need some widespread recognition
of all the things that, uh, pharmacy is doing
beyond the role of dispensing,
um, internationally.
Um, it's very clear that we've fallen
behind what's happening in other countries.
Um, there is, you know,
significant untapped potential across the pharmacy sector.
And it's very, from our feedback we get from our members,
uh, and members of the PLF, is that pharmacists want
to work at full scope.
They want to do more.
Um, and the similar technicians, um,
who work under the supervision of pharmacists, they
to do more as well.
And they believe they can do more
for the health of New Zealanders.
Uh, so it's quite, you know, it's quite clear,
and I know you hear this from many other parts
of the health system, that more, uh, more funding is needed
or sustainable funding is needed for pharmacy.
And this is across all parts, community general practice,
hospital, uh, with, you know,
the right level of sustainable funding.
They can do so much more in terms of access
to medicines for, for patients.
Um, and I think, you know, there is,
we did a workforce survey, um, at PCNZ
and that showed that our members were telling us, you know,
that they're, uh, facing significant challenges,
siping shortages, and that one of the key challenges
for 'em is, is funding.
Um, so I've actually launched through my slides
and content very quickly, um,
which allows us quite significant time for questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
And, uh, members will have received those slides
and through them, cam, you had your hand
Up. Yeah, I just had
a question to maybe kick it off
and thank you very much for,
um, bringing this to the committee.
We've got, uh, you've said, um, maybe just in a way
to elucidate a conversation, uh, have you, what did,
what did young pharmacists think they would be doing,
which they are not doing?
Uh, they thought they'd be fully utilizing the training
that they received at university.
And high level of pharmaceutical knowledge is, is, um,
ingrained in these individuals.
So they really thought they'd be utilizing that
to the fullness of their abilities to give high
medicines optimization to patients high level, um, therapy.
So it's linked to what you said about, um,
working at the top of their scope.
What is it that's stopping that happening?
So one of the key areas
where when we talk about full scope, that's relates
to the realms of prescribing.
So you have pharmac right now, you've got pharmacists,
prescribers, um, who would be fantastic as uh, uh,
pharmacist practitioners.
But then the next level down pharmacists have the skills
to work as independent prescribers for more, like
for some chronic condition management.
Um, things that we used to talk about in the minor ailments
scheme, which we know has, we can, but build on that.
Um, and so being able to use their skills in university in
that way is what part part of that?
Yeah. If anyone's got any sub. Alright.
Well, I, I thought you you go, you No, no. Go.
I've got a primary here.
No, no, it's, I you've
pretty much asked the same question.
So guys going.
Yeah. Um, so talking about, um, working to the top, top
of your scope, what are some of the conditions
that you are seeing?
Um, and I look, I suppose I'm mainly focusing
on community pharmacies.
Yeah. Because of also play a very important role
in our primary healthcare.
Um, and also in our community, increasing their access.
What are some of the conditions that, uh,
pharmacists are being frustrated about that they can't
actually in effect, uh, treat, um,
when they're coming into the pharmacy?
I'm gonna get, um, Chris to ask that
because Chris receives these calls, um, to our, um,
we call it pharmacist hotline, um, on a regular basis
around, you know, what are my boundaries in this area?
It's got some fantastic examples. Thank
You. Um, it's,
uh, more around the, um,
I suppose the things they can't do at the minute
that they could do is
around possibly chronic condition management.
Um, a lot of what pharmacists do is around, as you know,
you go into a pharmacy, you present your prescription,
if there are issues around the prescription,
they have to get those resolved.
And that takes the time. Um,
but they're focusing on the supply side
of things rather than the clinical
optimization of medicines.
So what they can't easily do at this moment in time,
'cause the way the system is designed is they can't
actually, if you went in with a prescription
and looked at it
and go, okay, we could improve this therapy port,
the general practitioner if could be,
but a lot of it is locked in the processes they have
to follow with regards to the supply.
Sorry, can I just go just,
just just further clarification.
What, what sort of things are you talking about?
You're talking about dosage, you're talking about changing
slightly, changing the medications.
And do, do you have any examples of some of the conditions
that that would be, would be affected? Uh,
It could be dosage at the moment.
Pharmacists do that with anticoagulation.
So there's a service that's running across some parts
of the country where warfarin is, um, titrated
by the pharmacist on collaborative agreement
with the general practitioner.
Um, allopurinol and the arthritis New Zealand will come
and talk to you about increasing access to gout.
So there's that sort of stuff that's coming online.
So those, those sorts of services actually are given
opportunity for pharmacists,
utilize bits more of their skills.
There's, um, example around, um, hba one C, um,
see some people are doing tests in that space
or blood pressure monitoring,
and at the moment if something untoward is picked up,
they referred back to their primary provider,
which is appropriate at this moment in time.
But if there's an ability to work collaboratively in
that space, so the patient doesn't necessarily have
to go back to the general practitioner, if it's appropriate,
then there's that sort of management that could occur.
I could give you a really good real life example with, uh,
Sarah who's here, who's also a pharmacist.
Um, a few weeks ago I got shingles on my hand,
which is unusual, but I did, and I had it
before, so I knew what it was.
And I went and saw Sarah in Unichem
and Cuba Street, uh, understanding orders,
which know be great improvement from that,
but understanding orders, she could do a consult with me.
She looked at it, she took some, um, notes,
my blood pressure, she was able to give me,
um, medicine right there.
And then my alternatives would've been to wait
and get a GP visit on a Monday or go to after hours
and pay $120 in Wellington.
And I think I paid, I think, was it $50? Yeah, $50.
So done and dusted, had the drugs went home,
that cleaned up shingles sooner.
And shingles can't last for a long time.
So it's actually really good to get it early.
That's just an example of how the public can benefit.
And that's a workaround at the moment.
If we actually have that as access, um, it would be,
you know, huge improvement.
Thank you. Come over to Tracy. Mm, thank
You. Um, you mentioned
the minor ailments scheme.
So essentially what you're saying is, is um, sort of,
um, building on that.
So are there, and I'm presuming that you'll have access
to some overseas analysis
or modeling that have shown that kind of, that, that, um,
system wide savings in terms of GP visits
and other health visits.
Is there any key lines from that that you'd like
to highlight?
Key lines from your research that
You've? Um,
I would say that the example would be, um,
either pharmacy first in, um, QB Farm in England,
or pharmacy First in Scotland.
They've shown some significant benefits
and the government in Scotland have just, uh,
commissioned some more work
and some more resource into that space.
Mm-hmm. So it's, um, I can provide the evidence
to you if you, if you would like it.
I, I talk to Scotland quite frequently. Mm-hmm.
Um, they're great to be collaborative
internationally and learn from each other.
So could that be great?
I can share that, no problem. Yeah. And
Anybody watching could Oh yeah.
Anyone else? Anyone else watching?
I can, I can provide it to the committee.
I don't know how it works from that perspective,
but yeah. Happy to provide.
Um, just to add, in Scotland, uh, 50%
of the community pharmacists are prescribers.
Mm-hmm. And they get a slight increase in
their remuneration to do that.
Mm-hmm. And if you go, I just recently went to London
and most funds that have a big long list in the window
of all the conditions that they can treat.
Yeah. So, which we can't do
some of them or we can't do others. And
That's what you mean by the untapped?
Absolutely, yes. I stop on that, Jeff. Uh, hold on.
I've go to Junior. Did you have
Question?
Just following up, uh, did you say 50% of, uh,
pharmacies, was it in Scotland?
In Scotland, yes. In Scotland.
Do they have additional training?
So the 50% that aren't mm-hmm.
Do the prescribing pharmacists have any more training than
the 50% that don't? Yes, they would
Have would. Yeah.
They would. Yes. Yes. And I would, to be fair,
I would expect training to be undertaken
to ensure competence and safety for the public.
I think that's, And
and mindful this will be our last question.
So my question is about your, um,
1000 community pharmacists and pharmacy.
It is pharmacy, sorry.
Um, and it is something that we need, especially
among MP from South, but also rural.
Mm-hmm. Um, towns.
My question is more about demand and supply.
Do you have, um, some of your smaller community pharmacies
actually tell you whether the,
there are pricing differences, say between them
and similar medications for a larger provider,
say like chemist Warehouse,
and do you have a projection, um,
forward whether you would continue
to have these community pharmacies, uh, into the future?
Or is there going to be a, a possible reduction
because of competition from smaller pharmacies
versus a bigger one?
We certainly do receive feedback from our members on the
challenges they face of having the different types
of providers opening, especially in those rural, um,
the rural environments.
It does create a challenge for them.
Um, we haven't done any projections in terms of
how many we expect might close over the coming years.
We hope they don't close, but we do.
Um, we haven't doing some work to help try
and strengthen our rural workforce and our rural pharmacies
because that is a, um,
even bigger challenge than the big centers.
So you don't know whether there are farm community
pharmacies that have closed over the last,
I don't know, five, 10 years or
So, we, we can provide you with, um,
there's a really good piece of research
that's been done recently.
And they've talked about pharmacy, excuse me,
pharmacy deserts in New Zealand, and
that's about rural New Zealand where you just,
pharmacists are closed
and you, they just can't have someone.
And one of our board members is from mfi.
It's getting people to come, it's getting people
to train, it's getting people to stay.
Right. So it's just that, so you're, you're right, these in
Terms terms of funding, 'cause you asked about more
funding, I just wondered whether that was also part of
The picture. And, and rural
is a real challenge for some
of our pharmacies for sustainability.
Um, irrespective of who's coming into the market, um,
we're aware of, I'm aware of one pharmacy that I worked
with, um, during the COVID pandemic.
He was really struggling to get access
because of his location.
I think he was 260 kilometers from
the nearest other pharmacy.
Um, but unfortunately,
and he was providing services to the other side
of the Gulf where he was based.
Um, unfortunately he was unable to sustain his business
and actually has had to close.
So the nearest pharmacy for that group
of people is about 260 K, which is a long way
for people to access healthcare.
Thank you. Thank you for making yourself available.
Thank, thank you very much. Appreciate your time. Thank you.
Thank you
Session.
Meg, very good to have you here.
Welcome to the health committee. I'm Sam Dale.
I have a number of members here as well.
We have you here for 10 minutes. And hello Megan as well.
Good to have you along. Hi there.
We have you here for 10 minutes.
You can use all that time to speak if you wish,
or you may leave us time for questions.
Always nice to have some time for questions,
but, um, ultimately that's over to you.
So I will hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Fantastic. Okay, so I would like to, um, leave us open
for questions, but I'd just quickly like to review
what it is that we are here for today.
Um, thank you so much for making the time for us
to come along and speak with you.
Um, so we are here to represent the over 400,000 people
who will be affected by an eating disorder in their lifetime
in AA to voice concern over the prospect of either
mandatory health star ratings on all foods
or, um, alternatives such
as warning labels being implemented.
So we're requesting that the House
of Representatives incorporates eating disorder lived
experience into the review of Health Star ratings
to protect those with
or at greater risk of developing an eating disorder.
Um, this is in line with the new eating disorder strategy
that was re uh, that was launched earlier this year
that demands
that eating disorders are considered across sectors.
Um, uh, alongside that, we recommend
that Health Star ratings are discontinued, um,
and that warning labels are not implemented.
That government explores alternative approaches
to incent incentivizing product reformulation
such as Perian tax.
Um, and again, that, um,
eating disorder voices are incorporated in this process.
Um, so just very briefly, there are two broad arguments
for Health star ratings.
The first is that they change consumer practices,
the second is reformulation.
So, um, in, in relation to that first point, um,
there's no evidence
that health Healthstar ratings actually
change consumer choices.
A 2022 study, Inoa found little
or no relationship between healthstar ratings
and products purchased.
Um, 44 countries have implemented some form of front of, um,
package nutritional label,
and there's little to no evidence that this has had any, um,
effect on population health.
In terms of the second point, um, it is true
that health star ratings have contributed
to reformulation approximately 79%
of products displaying health star
ratings have been reformulated.
However, um,
this process can happen without consumer awareness
and avoiding any impact on consumer.
Um, and that's where an option like Pion tax comes in.
So by that we're talking about sugar tax.
So an example in the uk, the implementation
of sugar tax has led to, um, uh, vast reformulation,
and that has, um,
translated into changes in population health.
Um, but what we really wanna highlight is
that there's been no research, um, on, um, the impacts
of, um, health star ratings on people living
with eating disorders and very little on front
of packaged nutritional labels
and the impact of that on people with eating disorders.
So we conducted a survey of 110 people, um, uh,
101 of those had lived experience of an eating disorder.
Um, 80% of our respondents believe that health star ratings
and warning labels are harmful for people
with eating disorders.
Um, people reported that it restricted their ability
to make choices around food,
that it reinforced eating disorder beliefs around good
and bad food, that it instilled a, a sense of guilt
and shame around food, um, that may be regarded as healthy,
but is nevertheless critical for, um, recovery.
Um, and some people reported
that they only bought five star products, um,
and that it, that it, um, fed into orthorexic tendencies.
Me as someone with lived experience of anorexia nervosa, um,
uh, I still to this day struggle to purchase products
that have a health star rating on them,
because to me, that's a moralization of food
that I don't need in my life when I am, um, every day, uh,
fighting against the eating disorder that, that,
that I have, I have well already fought so hard to,
to live my life in spite of.
Um, so just to conclude,
and I wanna, um, then make space for questions.
Um, the approach to using front
of package nutritional labels has been compared
to warning labels on cigarettes.
Um, but food is not the same as cigarettes.
No one is advocating that people stop eating.
Um, but that's what can happen.
Um, with healthstar ratings, um, uh, poorly mentored,
poorly implemented front of package nutritional labels,
promote the moralization
and demonization of food, impose a risk of undue harm
to people with or at risk of developing an eating disorder.
Um, this is a voice that remains unheard in
policy discussions.
Um, so that's, that's my spiel.
Um, I would love to make space now for questions. Um,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Meg. Thank you very much. Meg? Yes.
Hey, me, you have a question? Sorry. Thank, thank you, Meg.
So the thing is just, just a point, point of clarification.
On one hand, you are saying
that the health star ratings doesn't
change consumer behavior.
Mm-hmm. But on the other hand, are, are you saying
that people with eating disorders, uh, make up
that small percentage of people that do change
their consumer behavior because of that Health Star rating?
So that's a, it's, that's a really good question.
So I guess what I'm saying is that there's no evidence,
I mean, no research has been done on the impact, um, uh,
of health star ratings on people with eating disorders.
When we look at research conducted on the impact
of health star ratings on the general population
and consumer habits, um, then there's no evidence
that they lead to the positive changes
that people want to see.
Um, uh, so that would be changes in, in, um, consumer habits
that might align with, with, um, population understanding
of, of healthy food.
Um, there isn't any research yet on, um, the impact
of people living with eating disorders.
Um, apart from the small survey that we've done.
And what we're asking for is that you take, is that, is
that, is that you take that into account, um, when, um,
looking at the review of Health star ratings
and what we implement going forward, does that clarify?
Yeah, kind of. Sorry.
Um, but you're, say you're saying that it's really bad,
but then it doesn't have much effect in consumer behavior.
I suppose that's, that's the kind of thing that I'm,
that I'm just grappling with at the moment.
I could see Megan putting her hand up, so I might,
I was thinking, hello.
Thank you for, um, talking with us.
I think to clarify that perhaps it's good
to look at some numbers so that, um,
the latest eating disorder, uh, strategy that was launched
by our current government, um, identified
that up to 7.8% of
New Zealanders will experience an
eating disorder in their lifetime.
That translates to over 400,000 people.
Um, so although we are saying the general population,
it doesn't change their behavior.
We know that people with an eating disorder, um,
can be affected by these, um,
gold stars if you like the stars on front,
front, front of packaging.
Yeah. Um, so perhaps I think
what Meg is saying is we are
asking for a voice at the table.
Um, that's
What I, Because those data don't exist yet.
Um, for people living with eating disorders
and absence of evidence is not evidence of absence.
Mm.
Cam no, they should just answer my question. Okay.
Thank you. Do any other members have questions? I would, Dr.
Ra and love
and thank you Meg, um, in particular,
and Megan as well for, for your support.
But Meg, thank you very much for your submission.
It's always really good for the committee
to hear from people who lived experience on these issues.
Um, appreciate the courage it takes for you to come forward,
uh, present, live as you have done this afternoon. Kiara,
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Enjoy your afternoon.